bash	Command shell 
bc	Desktop calculator 
bison	Parser generator 
cvs	Revision control system 
dejagnu	Testing framework 
flex	Scanner generator 
fvwm	Window manager 
g77	Fortran compiler 
gawk	GAWK interpreter 
genscript	Text-to-PostScript converter 
ghostview	PostScript previewer 
glibc	C library 
gnuchess	Chess player 
gnuplot	Graph Plotter 
groff	Text formatter 
gs	PostScript interpreter 
gzip	File compressor 
m4	Macro expander 
perl	Perl interpreter 
plan	Schedule planner 
python	Python interpreter 
rcs	Revision control system 
remind	Schedule reminder 
workman	Audio CD player 
xfig	Drawing program 
zephyr	Notification system 
zsh	Command shell 
zzz<total>	 
