Mike:  My responses follow '->' markers below --01/31/99 gjb


Can "extra linguistic" be precisely defined? 

-> Maybe we should talk about textual processing features of Cpp and
discuss instead how it can provide abstraction facilities that the C
language proper (is that phrase well-defined to you? to our readers?)
does not support


----------------

To Greg:

Write a good motivation of why "syntactic" classification is named that.
-> I added some more description, and explain in terms of hiding of
syntactic elements in unprocessed view;  I give parenthetical example of 
Emacs's indentation mode.

The methodology section doesn't describe some of the limitations of pcp3.
For instance, macros used in macros aren't marked.
-> These are *not* expansions!  What do you think the below outputs?

/* begin example */
#define FOO 5
#define BAR FOO
#define FOO 9
BAR
/* end example */

-> The expansion of BAR causes FOO to get expanded at the last line of
the example, *not* on the line where BAR is #defined.  Since FOO doesn't 
occur on the line where it is expanded, there is nothing to mark.  Maybe 
this example is interesting since perhaps it is counterintuitive?
(Similarly for:

/* begin example */
#define FOO 5
#define BAR FOO
#undef FOO
BAR
/* end example */

What version of LCLint did you use when you tried running it on the
packages?
-> Version 2.3i -- 15 Sep 97;  I added the version number to the text,
but can't fairly expand on the results as I have no recollection any
longer.


Page 19:
How accurate is ``very accurate in practice''?  How do you know?  What
would constitute perfect accuracy?  How many instances did you spot
check?  How did you select them?
-> I dropped that sentence, since the sentence before tells exactly what 
we did, and that matches exactly what we say we discard.  The intended
point was that:

#ifndef FOO
#define FOO 5
#define BAR 7
#endif

doesn't happen very often.  But when it does happen, it's not strictly
just for redefinition prevention.


Page 22:
Explain the significance of the data.  Could the categories be reordered to
make the significance clearer?

-> I added a paragraph about the data at the end.  I don't love it,
though, since elsewhere we've generally refrained from subjective and
what-if scenarios.
